Taj Mahal needs no introduction. This monument is on the list of the Seven Wonders of the World. No wonder people swarm in flies all year round to witness the magnificence of his beauty. This monument is located in India in the city of Agra in Uttar Pradesh. In other words, Taj Mahal marks the excellence of Mughal architecture.Taj Mahal is one of the main reasons why India is famous. Many people even associate India with Taj Mahal. However, to me, more than the splendid architecture, it is the story behind it that appeals to me the most. This magnificent beauty stands strong as a symbol of the love of a husband to his wife. Moreover, it reminds us of the power of love and how it can set an example for generations to come.The renowned Taj Mahal was brought to life by the vision of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan. He got this monument built for his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal after she passed away.To honor the memory of his loving wife, Shah Jahan ordered the finest artisans from all over the world to build it. He wanted to make something that had never been done before for anyone. The emperor wished to give the last gift to his wife whom he loved very much.Even till date, people sing praises about Shah Jahan’s grand gesture. It makes you believe in love and appreciate it like never before. We also see how under the tomb lies the body of the eternal lovers. Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal are buried next to each other and even after death, they remained side by side.Making of Taj Mahal.Taj Mahal was declared as a Heritage Site by UNSECO in 1983. What makes this monument so special? Why do people come from all walks of life to witness its magnificence? Taj Mahal is made from white marble. Subsequently, this marble was exported from various countries from all over the world.They began constructing it in 1630 and it finally got completed in a time span of almost 20 years. Shah Jahan rejected numerous designs before finally settling on the present structure. Taj Mahal involves a lot of smart architecture. The four pillars that stand in the corners are inclined a little. This was done to prevent the monument from any kind of natural disaster. Shah Jahan spent a hefty amount of money in the making of Taj Mahal.In addition, we see how the building of this structure required 20,000 workers approximately to get the work completed. Moreover, the architecture of Taj Mahal was inspired by several architecture styles like India, Turkish, Persian and more. Furthermore, you will see a beautiful fountain in front of the Taj Mahal with water channels. The reflection of the Taj in the water just makes for a mesmerizing view. It looks nothing short of a fairyland. In conclusion, every Indian takes pride in the beauty of the Taj Mahal and its heritage. This monument is famous all over the world. Around 2 to 4 million people come to visit the Taj Mahal every year. The beauty and history of the monument attract people the most and makes it famous all over the world.